# ZK interoperability between chains
## a specification for a light client based on zero-knowledge proofs: sync and transaction

Plumo system's  goal is light client efficiency:

securely synchronize to the head of the chain by downloading a small amount of data and perform a short computation.

new blocks BFT consensus executed by a set of validators.
The set of validations can change based on pos ) at the end of every epoch. Each validator use public key+secret signing key  to signs blocks.

make queries to the latest state only the current head of the chain.

the adversary is computationally bounded, cryptographic building blocks relies SNARK which srs generated by a suitable MPC setup ceremony.

- verify that a quorum of ≥ 2n/3 currently approved validators signed each block
- synchronize only epoch-transition blocks until they reach the head of the chain
- Signature aggregation(BLS) enables replacing all the signatures with a single signature
- verifying this proof does not need to see the intermediate blocks, headers or even validator sets(SNARK).

relay node periodically transmits to the contract constant-size, check-point information as commitments to the BFT chain
### ref
[Plumo Paper](https://docs.zkproof.org/pages/standards/accepted-workshop3/proposal-plumo_celolightclient.pdf)

##  light clients for bridge applications
Bridge is a smart contract bridge with light client functionality such as Rainbow Bridge of the NEAR Protocol.
- smart contract with Ethereum's light client functionality is deployed on the NEAR
- smart contract with NEAR Protocol's light client functionality is also deployed on Ethereum
- light clients will hold the latest block headers to enable the exchange of tokens
- Verification of the information to be conveyed during a cross-chain transaction is done by both chains by calculating the Markle root from the Markle tree and verifying that it matches the Markle root stored in the header
### ref
[Explaining the structure and types of blockchain bridges Learning about the benefits and risks of each type](https://mirror.xyz/0x8Df126302a7EA75E7013Ec8Ad6bFaC14DD84a5fF/Cxa5L18eGjr8y08VkELx9m61-yl1-h-oTT2z7SjNhuo)

##  porting Plumo on celo over to Harmony
- Plumo zk-SNARKs allow light clients to quickly verify transitions from epoch X to epoch X + Y （hop until reach the latest proof）
- proofs generated by multiple nodes
- need one more Plumo MPC setup