# 1. questions about Tornado Cash & Semaphore protocols
## Tornado Cash
- part of the withdrawal address can be analyzed？
- can't mix large amounts of money in a short time?
## Semaphore
- Better integration with Metamask
- code audit plan
- improvement for ZK-kit libraries basing circuits and contracts
# 2. universal circuits for dapps: one circuit for all dapps --- ZKEVM
## ZKEVM for universality
At present, developers need to write circuits for each particular business(asic circuits), which has poor expansibility, portability and generality.

Zkevm is introduced to shield circuit implementation details for business developers, and the circuit logic is executed by bytecode compatible ZK virtual machine that implements EVM at the bottom of the protocol.

## ZkEVM is moving very fast
### Language level solutions
Language level solutions, such as starkware and zksync2.0, will soon be available. 
Starkware strong ecological stack dydx/starkex/starknet/starkware.
zksync relatively strong community-driven, l2 zkevm is expected to launch in the second quarter.
#### Starkware
Starkware: Warp translate solidity into Cairo; Cairo as a low-level circuit programming language, using the Stark air scheme based on vnTinyRAM.
#### Zksync2.0
Zksync2.0: Solidity /zinc(turing-complete) translated into LLVM IR, custom Gate + plonk Lookup + recursive proof for dedicated circuits based on Tinyram general calculation + Hash /signature
### Bytecode level solutions
In addition, the instruction set development progress of the bytecode level scheme EFs [appliedzkp/zkevm-circuits](https://github.com/appliedzkp/zkevm-circuits) has reached about 2/3.

It is based on state Proof + EVM Proof + LOOKUP, using halo2 architecture, using halo2 circuit development interface + plookup to achieve lookup tabel, for EVM instruction sets each instruction to implement the circuit. 

Community development is very active at the moment.
#### hermez & Aztec
In addition, hermez's UVM based architecture and Aztec's ZkVM solution based on noir [The Noir Programming Language](https://noir-lang.github.io/book/index.html) design are also in rapid iteration.
## expect for Zk dapps
Strongly optimistic that ZkEVM will be successfully launched in 2022, and it will be EVM compatible. 

The first step is the language-level scheme, followed by the more compatible bytecode level scheme.

Eventually developers will be able to fully reuse solidity contract business code without paying attention to circuit implementation details, and only need to modify very small configurations and other information to implement ZK-DApps.